Every step you take in the next five seconds worth of future is taken in the power of grace.
The next one is in the power of grace.
And you are going down, down, down, down into glorious dependence upon more and more grace.
And your debt is becoming bigger and bigger and bigger to the glory of God's grace every second of your life.
So get out of your mind forever the payback mentality to God.
I think most of us at least sometimes live with some version of the idea that we need to pay God back, at least a little.
And Piper just says no.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper pulls us deeper into the kind of grace that won't let us try to repay it, even if just a little.
This message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the Act III Reformation Conference on October 29, 1999.
The debtor's ethic is impossible.
It's not just impossible because of human limitations, it's impossible because of the way God has set up the world.
What I mean is this.
If you say, God has been so gracious to me, He's lavished me with grace that I will now take steps of obedience by which I will pay the debt of grace that I owe Him.
Oh, to grace, I'll grade the debt or daily I'm constrained to be.
And so,
I will now take steps to repay my debt of grace.
You know why that's impossible?
Because every step you take called obedience is totally dependent on more grace.
And therefore, all you do with every step of obedience is go deeper into debt.
And I'm not making this up.
I'm basing it on 2 Corinthians 9, 8, which says, God is able to make all grace abound to you so that having enough of everything, you will also have grace for every good work.
How do you do a good work?
Grace.
You cannot.
pay one nickel back with obedience because if it's genuine evangelical obedience, it is depending on more grace, which is why I call the book future grace.
Because every step you take in the next five seconds worth of future is taken in the power of grace.
The next one is in the power of grace.
And you are going down, down, down, down into glorious dependence upon more and more grace.
And your debt is becoming bigger and bigger and bigger to the glory of God's grace every second of your life.
So get out of your mind forever the payback mentality to God.
It's impossible.
That's reason number
One, reason number two, if it were possible, grace would no longer be grace, but a business transaction.
If you could successfully pay the mortgage in payments of obedience, grace would be nullified as Romans 4, 4, and 5 makes very, very clear to him who works his wage
is reckoned not according to grace, but according to debt.
But the Him who does not work, but trusts in Him who justifies the ungodly His faith is reckoned for righteousness, and therefore, just like Acts 17, 25, warns you not to serve, Romans 4, 5 warns you not to work.
Rather, it is all dependence upon grace,
And what I'm calling you to tonight, if you don't know how to do it, is to find a way to serve wholly dependent on grace for every step you take.
Whether you eat, or whether you drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God, and the giver gets the glory, and therefore you must find a way to eat and drink so that
You are a getter and not a giver.
God's got to be the giver of grace at every moment of your life.
That's reason number two.
You nullify grace.
If you were to succeed at paying it back, and the third is implicit in the first two, if you make an attempt to live your life by the jitters ethic, call it the gratitude ethic.
call it the tanto ethic, whatever you want, this payback mentality.
You will make short shrift of future grace and think only in terms of past grace and most of the grace on which your life hangs is in the future.
Now that's a dangerous statement because I love the cross.
We sing a worship song and
Written by Mark Elchoge in our church.
I love the cross.
I love the cross where my Savior died.
I love the cross where I was justified.
I love the cross.
But the cross is where all my future enabling grace was bought.
And I live in it.
for eternity by depending on it being poured out on the basis of that.
So, there are texts that capture this.
One of them is, is Romans 8, 32.
You know what, another is Romans 5, 9, another is Romans 5, 10.
He who did not, past tense, he who did not spare his only son, but gave him up for us all.
So you walk back, you look back, and you stand on that.
Oh, God, thank you.
Thank you that you didn't spare your own son.
You gave him up for me so that, like 2 Corinthians 5, 21 says, he who knew no sin, took my sin, became sin for me, that I might have his righteousness.
Yes, thank you, thank you, thank you.
All my sins gone.
All his righteousness, mine.
He who did not spare his own son.
How shall he not now with him freely give us all things for eternity?
And that's where you live.
Do you trust that promise?
Taking your stand on the finished work of Christ that purchased it all and fit you as a justified person to be changed and receive it?
Do you trust?
And that's
where you live.
That's where you serve, serving God so that the excellency of grace is magnified in your life, not so that God is put in the position of a mortgage payment receiver.
Now, what's the alternative ethic that I would put in its place?
And I would simply
I'll point you to a couple of texts.
One is Psalm 50 verses 12 to 15, maybe just verse 15.
Instead of our meeting God's needs, you know, if I were hungry, I would not ask you, the psalm says, the cattle on a thousand hills are mine.
And here's the alternative he gives.
Call on me, call on me in the day of trouble.
And I will deliver you and you will glorify me."
See the dynamic?
You want to get glory for me?
You want to glorify me?
You want to make my excellency shine in your life?
You want to lift up and honor my excellency?
Call on me to work.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth seeking to show himself mighty on behalf of those whose heart
His hold towards Him.
There is no God like thee, no I has seen a God like thee, no ear has perceived, or I've seen a God like thee who works for those who wait for Him.
Bell, the God, bows down.
Nebo bows down.
They are carried away on carts into Babylon, but God carries you.
All the religions of the world have gods that need to be carried by human labor, slave labor.
There's no grace, free, sovereign grace in any religion.
But Christianity.
Our God glorifies Himself by working for us, not by our working for Him.
When I run my jogging route down Franklin, up Cedar Avenue, cross Washington Avenue, down 11th, about a two mile thing, there's a
a foundry that I run by, they have a permanent help-wanted sign.
Been there for years.
Only sometimes there's a big diagonal, red, no plaster right on the front of me.
No help-wanted.
And every time I run by, when the red sign is up, I say, yes, this is God's sign.
This is the gospel.
No help wanted.
I'm here to help you.
You come broken, empty, hungry, thirsty, weak, tired.
Come to me, all you self-sufficient, and work for me, and I will pay you wages.
It's not the gospel, but come to me, all you who are weak and heavy laden, and I will give you wrath.
That's the gospel.
I will flex my arms like I did at the Red Sea.
And you will praise me for the Exodus forever and ever and ever and learn to trust me for manna in the wilderness.
What made God so upset about the wilderness is that they didn't get it.
Mermer, mermer, mermer.
You ever, mermer?
Philippians 2 says, put away all grumbling and questioning.
And if you do, you'll shine like lights.
in the midst of a dark, corrupted world.
Because the world is full of murmurs.
And it's a rare thing to find a person whose faith and future grace is so profoundly rooted in Jesus Christ's work that come what horrible circumstances, whether it's leukemia, taking your 23-year-old boy away like happened in our church two weeks ago.
Whether it's like my dad at 80 having hip surgery yesterday,
Whether it's like some of you in this room would walk through the most horrible divorces that you can imagine.
Whether it's wayward kids that are breaking your heart.
No!
The promises of God are totally sufficient to turn every circumstance for good so that you rest in Him and you don't have to work for Him.
You know He's going to work for you.
Well, how shall I wrap this up?
maybe by giving you the practical, this is the most practical thing I can think to say on all these pages here, one more text and then a practical suggestion.
The text is a verse that I think kind of seals the biblical reality of what I'm saying.
If you're wondering, hmm, hmm, that sounds sort of right, but it sounds like it might be a
kind of a logical deduction from what the Bible says rather than what the Bible says.
And John was kind of trying to warn us this morning against doing theology that way, I think, spinning out logical deductions instead of sticking with biblical vocabulary.
So let me give you some biblical vocabulary to restate my point.
It's 1 Peter 4-11 and it goes like this, let him who serves.
So now you can all relax, he believes in service.
But I really don't.
Except in Peter's sense, let him who serves serve in the strength that God supplies so that in everything God might get the glory through Jesus Christ to whom belongs the dominion forever.
Whatever.
What a verse.
It's all there.
Why have we been talking for thirty-five minutes holding back when the whole thing is in one verse?
I'll say it again.
Let him who serves, so let us serve, but watch it, lest you dishonor the excellency of God.
Let him who serves serve in the strength that God supplies.
The giver gets the glory that God supplies so that in everything God might get the glory
through Jesus Christ to whom belongs the dominion forever and ever.
Now here's my practical nitty gritty.
Rubber meets the road suggestion.
If you read the supremacy of God in preaching, you know this.
It's called Aptap, A-P-T-A-T.
It's an acronym, and I wrote that book about 10 years ago or so, and I sit in it that I do it every time I preach.
I'm now preaching for 20 years, and I do it.
every time I preach.
Nothing's changed.
Not one letter.
So let me just close by telling you what aptat is.
A-P-T-A-T.
I was sitting over there beside Scott, bow my head, you know, two minutes, three minutes before I'm supposed to come up here, and I'm walking through aptat, and it went like this.
I just relieved of those minutes for about 40 minutes ago.
A. Jesus, I gotta go up there now.
And I admit,
Without you, admit, admit, admit.
I admit without you, I can do nothing.
John 15-5, without me, you can do nothing.
P, pray.
Father, help me.
Please give me memory, give me liberty, give me passion.
Give me yourself.
Give me light.
Give me hope.
Give me joy.
Give me humility.
Give me love.
Give me fresh prophetic insights into what these folks need.
You know them.
I don't need them.
I mean, I don't know them.
I don't need them either, but that's not the point.
Maybe that was a prophetic slip.
I don't need you to give you verses for pray, do I?
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I'll deliver you, John.
I'll deliver you from vanity and the love of the praise of men and fear, T, A-P-T, trust Him as you go up to that pulpit.
We're talking future grace now.
Almost at the end of 35 minutes of future grace, which is 33 minutes of past grace.
And the rest of the night is future day.
Tomorrow will be future.
If I wake up in the morning, it'll be future grace.
So, but on the front end of it, it's still future.
And so I trust him.
And what I mean is something very specific.
I mean, go into the memory bank of your mind.
If you don't have a memory bank in your mind, go into the Bible and find a specific word for this moment.
Take it, say it,
And believe it.
Say to Jesus, I believe it.
You said it, I believe it.
And here's the verse I use.
He believes in me.
Out of this innermost being will flow rivers of living water.
That's my goal.
That was what God pressed on me in the last couple of days.
When you get up there, may living water flow.
I will do it.
Trust me.
Trust in the Lord with all your heart.
Do not rely on your own insight.
In all your ways, acknowledge him.
He'll make your past straight.
Proverbs 3.5 and 6.
So there's a text for that point.
And the last one, no, two more.
A.
Act.
Get up there and preach, man.
It won't get said.
If you don't say it, go up there.
Get up there.
You stay sitting over there.
This word's not going to get spoken.
Act.
Text Philippians 2, 13.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
For it is God bubbling up in you to be a river of life for the people.
Work.
Do it.
I call you to do it.
Use your will to do it.
Use your mind to do it.
Use your arms to do it.
I know you're back there.
Finally, tea.
Tell me what it is.
Some of you read the book.
but you know what it is without the blood.
Thank.
I'm almost ready.
I'm already doing it inside.
Thank you for helping me.
Thank you for letting me go 15 minutes over time.
I really am done.
That's it.
If you want to know how does John Piper attempt to serve in the strength that God supplies so that in everything God gets the glory, it's apt to and if you can help me do it better, man, I am ready to get your emails.
because this is the goal of my life to figure out how to exercise mind, heart, muscles, hands, eyes, intellect, so that I don't get the glory.
God gets the glory.
That's the goal of my life.
And if you can help me, do it better.
If you've seen anything in my demeanor tonight, anything in my words tonight or anything you see on our website or anything that you think is compromising the glory of God and calling excessive anger to me or whatever you will do me.
And God, a great honor, great service in the right way, I hope.
If you let us know, let me know.
He knows.
Let's pray.
Oh, God in heaven, I want so much to know the secret of the Christian life.
I am crucified with Christ.
It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.
And the life I, I, I, yes, somehow, now live.
I live by faith.
There it is in the Son of God who loved me, loved me, and gave himself for me.
That's what I want, Lord.
That's what I believe almost everybody in this room longs for right now.
And so I just lift up a corporate loan to you as we close.
May the mind of Christ come.
May the mind of Christ be in us.
May we be humble under that mind, O God.
May we vanish as it were, so that it's all grace.
I worked harder than any of them, nevertheless it was not I, but the grace of God that was with me.
That's what we were, O God.
Do it now.
Do it as we leave this place in a few minutes.
in Jesus' great and merciful name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ, with a message titled,
Appointed to suffer God's strategy for finishing the mission.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit DesiringGod.org.